In 2021, a comprehensive archaeological study was conducted
in the Reformed church of Fântânele,
involving the excavation of 19 archaeological trenches,
covering both the interior of the church and the churchyard.
Due to the burial customs typical of the Middle Ages and the Early Modern Period,
the entire interior of the church is almost filled with early graves.
Therefore, during the excavation of these early graves, all previous evidence and constructions were either dismantled or destroyed by the grave pits.
At the northern wall, we were able to observe an earlier archaeological assemblage, presumably an Árpádian-era dwe lling.
It appears that the  corner of the plot was cut off by the tower of the church nave.
During the excavation, we found fragments of Árpádian-era pottery and net weights,
all of which are associated with this type of archaeological find.
It’s conceivable that the early Árpádian settlement extended from here
to the northern boundary of the present-day village,
on the opposite side of the main road, but this cannot be conclusively
proven without archaeological excavations.
Undeniably, the most important and exciting part of the
excavation was the exploration of the crypt itself.
We discovered a very intriguing semi-circular entrance,
leading to a substantial tomb structure with a diameter of over 2 meters,
constructed with meticulous brick walls, a testament to the
craftsmanship of several skilled artisans.
And it’s significant because the entire tomb structure provided a wealth of new information about the early modern aristocratic crypts of Transylvania:
we learned about how ventilation was established,
as we found the cap of the ventilation shaft at the top of the vault.
Additionally, we observed how the coffins could have been positioned
within this chamber.
The most exciting aspect of all this is that we’re dealing with a tomb structure
that remains untouched anthropogenically.
There are no traces of human intervention, but the effects of leakage and previous floods or water movements have completely dama  ged the interior of the crypt.
However, within a layer of mud about 60-70 centimeters thick, the remains of those interred here are remarkably well preserved, almost like in a time capsule.
We found numerous valuable jewels, including gold jewelry
associated with members of the Szövérdi–Bethlen family.
Throughout the excavation, we had the opportunity to conduct local rapid anthropological analyses of the skeletons.
We were able to identify the remains of approximately three to four
adult individuals and five to six children who died before the age of ten.
Out of respect, the skeletons were reburied, but samples were taken
from each skeleton for further analysis.